Welcome back everyone in this lecture.
We're going to explain how face detection works with the viola Jones algorithm of Haar Cascades so we
can explore face detection using Haar cascades which is a key component of the VLA Jones object detection
framework.
And if you're interested in the Wikipedia article on this general topic just look up VLA Jones object
detection framework and Ill explain the process.
We've also linked as a resource the original paper which I really encourage you to read.
It's a really well-written paper.
Now keep in mind what we're covering here is face detection not face recognition.
We're going to be able to very quickly detect if a face is in an image and actually locate it.
However we don't really know whose face it belongs to.
We'll just be able to say yes that is the face we would need a really large data set and deep learning
for actual facial recognition.
Being able to not only detect the face but then say it belongs to for example Jose.
So right now we're keeping things simple and just talking about face detection this arose in 2001 with
Paul VLA and Michael Jones when they published their method of face detection based on the really simple
concept of just analyzing a few key features.
Now what's really cool is they also came up with this idea of pre-computed an integral image to save
time on calculations to actually find these features.
So let's first understand the main feature types that Viola and Jones proposed how we can actually calculate
them and then how we can use an integral image to really speed up the computational process.
So the main feature types are edge features where you have white against black either in horizontal
or vertical directions.
And then you also have line features.
Again here we have dark with white on the sides horizontal or vertical.
And then you also have four rectangle features that look like this.
Now each feature is a single value obtained by subtracting the sum of pixels under the white rectangle
from the sum of pixels under the black rectangle.
That would be specifically for the edge example.
So realistically our images aren't going to be perfect edges or lines.
We're not going to have a perfect zero to one edge so let's see what that would actually look like as
far as Kuchel these features.
If you have a perfect edge it's on the left hand side where you're going to do is take the average in
the dark region and then subtract that from the average in the light region.
And for a perfect edge that would be one.
Mine is zero.
So 1 but for our realistic example have something that looks more like this on the right hand side.
So let's go ahead and explore the calculation.
So the closer the result is to 1 the better the feature if we actually explore the coloration for our
more realistic image on the right hand side we can kind of tell there's an edge there.
So what we end up doing is we first sum that dark region and then some delite region.
Then we take the average of them and we calculate the average to be 0.8 one for that dark region and
then 0.1 5 for the lighter region which means their overall Delta is going to be 0.1 to 5 is 0.1 5 which
is equal to zero point six six to five.
And recall that if this was absolutely perfect the score would be one.
So the closer we are to one then the better the actual feature.
And you can then decide on a threshold value to essentially throw away this feature and say that it
didn't pass and then have this feature or that it did pass.
So we could say something like above 0.5 there is an edge there.
Now keep in mind calculator in those sums for the entire image will be computationally expensive because
you basically have to check for every single possibility of every feature that you have in your set.
So what the viola Jones algorithm does is it solves this by using the integral image.
And this results in an order one running time of the algorithm.
So it's really quite clever what they did here.
So what you do is you pre-calculate an integral image which is also known as a summed area table over
here on the left hand side.
We have our original image and the original pixel values.
Over here on the right hand side we have the some area table or the integral image.
The way you calculate this integral image is actually pretty straightforward.
All you do is you go along these pixel values and then you sum them up.
So for example I have 31 here so I have 31 here then my next value is 33 which is just the sum of 31
plus two.
Then if I want to keep going then I add four to that.
So 33 plus four is then 37.
If I add 33 to 37 then I get 70 and so on.
And what that allows us to do is it allows us to quickly calculate the sum of any rectangle on the actual
image so we can see here as we go along.
To sum up a sub rectangle of its values from the original image each color spot highlights the sum inside
the rectangle of that color which is essentially just the bottom right hand corner of that particular
rectangle.
So notice if I wanted to take the some of this red rectangle here which is three by two then I just
need to locate its bottom right hand corner in reference to the top left.
So that sum is 101 and if I actually want to then perform calculations such as subtracting a light region
from a dark region I'd be able to do it really fast if I had access to this integral table.
Which is why we pre-calculate it before him.
So this allows the algorithm to actually run very very fast.
OK.
So let's go ahead and move along.
So after that the algorithm also saves time by going through a cascade of classifiers which are essentially
the features.
And this means we're going to treat the image to a series or a cascade of classifiers based off the
simple feature shown earlier those edges and lines.
Once an image fails the classifier we can stop attempting to try to detect the face there.
A common misconception behind face detection specifically of this algorithm is that the algorithm is
slowly scanning the entire image looking for a face that would actually be really efficient.
Instead we're passing this cascade of classifiers.
So let's work through a very simple example.
First what we need is a person looking front towards the camera that can be looking slightly off front
but more or less they should be recognizable from the front of their face.
That's what this algorithm was trained to do.
So once we have that we turn it into a greyscale image because for our use case we're only really interested
in light versus dark regions of features.
So we just need the greyscale image.
Then we begin in our search for the haar cascade features.
So what we do here is we start with one of the very first features and I believe one of the very first
ones that searched for is the indication between the eyes and the cheeks.
So we can see that the eyes will probably be darker than the light cheek region.
So that means we have this first feature and we scan the image for it and see if it passes this test
if it doesn't pass this feature right away.
So if the image were to fail for the search of this particular feature then we can quickly say that
there is no face there we would have to search the other thousands of features.
Instead we just have this cascade or series of features otherwise known as classifiers to classify whether
or not we have a face there.
Now if that one passed then we search for the next classifier or a feature which is usually I think
the bridge of the nose.
And this just keeps going and going until you pass the majority of them and you can have some sort of
threshold as far as what you indicate as a feature pass or a classifier pass.
So again you continue this maybe the eyebrows you do the mouth and so on just using these really simple
ideas of edge features and line features until the outgrown the sides.
Yes I've detected a face here because it kept passing all these classifiers.
Now theoretically this approach can be used for a variety of objects or the sections not just faces
for example will also work for the pre-trained detector.
The downside to this algorithm is that you would actually need a very large dataset in order to create
your own features or classifiers.
However luckily many pre-trained sets of features already exist.
So we'll be able to use pre-trained classifiers open if he comes of a lot of these pre-trained SML files
for various Haar Cascades later on in the deep learning section of the course.
We're going to see how to create our own classification algorithms for any distinct group of images.
So because this actual algorithm requires such huge data sets it's a little more efficient to show you
how to create your own recognition.
Classifiers an object detection classifiers using deep learning instead of trying to build out your
own hard Cascades.
So instead we'll be using pre-trained Haar Cascades for this section of the course but later on we will
show you how to train on your own images.
OK so we've placed pre-trained ex-MIL files in the data folder and you're also going to be using a pre-trained
file for your upcoming project assessment which is a really cool project.
I'm super excited for it.
But first let's explore how to use facial detection with open C-v and these pre-trained ex-MIL files.
I'll see you in the next lecture where we actually open Jupiter and get started.